Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Orna Donov. She's a
sociologist, lecturer, writer, and feminist activist. She teaches at
Tel Aviv University, Ben-Gurion University. And the academic College
of Tel Aviv Yafu. Her field of study focuses
on the social expectations projected on women, both those
who are mothers and those who are not, especially
by choice. And today we're going to focus mostly
on her book Regretting Motherhood A Study. So Dr.
Rodonov, welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you very much for inviting me.
So let me ask you this to start off
with. So what motivated you to study this phenomenon
of women who regret motherhood, and why do you
think it is important for us to understand it?
I conducted my first study about women here in
Israel who don't want to be mothers, and there
was one sentence that kept troubling me, and that's
a certain promise to women that they will surely
regret if they will not become mothers. And as
a sociologist, I started to wonder whether we are
facing here a political usage of emotions. That society
uses regret in order to align women into motherhood
and how come we never heard about the possibility
that women might regret becoming mothers, so I decided
to write my PhD about it. Uh, I thought
that we can learn a lot about not only
about regretting motherhood, but also about society, about things
that we are taking for granted. And uh that
causes a lot of pain and suffering in lives
of women and also sometimes children due to it.
Right, and I mean you talked about this typical
idea that people try to inculcate in women, particularly
also sometimes in men, but mostly in women, that
they will regret not having children. I mean, where
do you think that this idea comes from and
why do you think that it's so relevant in,
I guess, every human society?
Yeah, um. Look, society would like us to have
children. Uh, CHILDREN is, uh, is considered to be
strength, you know, high, higher birth rates are strength,
uh, political, economical, uh, in military, uh, territory, uh,
high birth rates are needed in any country, and
society would like the right people to have, uh,
and I'm quoting. Unquote, of course that will have
more children, so they are trying to control the
ability of women to have children because it is
needed and also I don't, I'm not familiar with
a society that doesn't consider like a real, another
quote unquote, a real femininity as going hand in
hand with motherhood. Uh, YOU know, this is in
patriarchal societies and heteronormative societies, and they, um, Uh,
these children are needed and also it is needed
in order to keep women in place, uh, in
their places, so in our places, so we are
being like monitored not to move to a different
place other than being wives and mothers still. Also
today in 2026, even though it might be more
subtle, it's not uh with the real power, but
it's like a quiet power, and it's going through
our minds and we are being frightened and we
are being told that the right way to live
life, it's like the, the, the heteronormative life. And
every, because we are considered uh female and we
are considered like our biological destiny, like our destiny
is coded in our biology. And we are being
told that there is no other destination or meaning
in women's life other than becoming mothers, so regret.
Is uh being uh used. In order to frighten
us, not to go on an alternative path other
than wives and mothers.
Yeah, and this idea that is certainly tied to
more traditional gender roles of women being mothers, having
children, and also taking care of them, of course.
I mean it, it manifests in many different ways.
I mean, it's not only the ways we tend
to associate it with, like for example in religious
settings where people people might talk about even a
mission, the mission of women, but also, I mean,
even in secular societies, people talk about the role
of women and also men, of course, but here
we're focusing mostly on women. The role of women,
so I mean it can have different kinds of
manifestations, but all of them are tied to gender
roles that we or the gender role that women
are assigned, right?
Yeah, exactly, and we are all the time in
different ways being told that it will be the
wrong way to live. Uh, THAT we will be
miserable or that we are selfish or that we
are childish or that we are insane or that
we are egoistic and if we are not um
Like Saluting to the, to this gender role of
being mothers, exactly,
and I mean in terms of motherhood, what tends
to characterize it in terms of the positive and
the negative aspects that go associated with it and
of course here we're focusing. Mostly on the negative
aspects because we're talking about women who regret being
mothers and that's something that society in general, it's
a topic that it tries to avoid and doesn't,
and most people don't really want. To discuss it
or tell women that it's that there's the possibility
that they will regret being mothers, but I mean,
give us both the positive and the negative aspects
that are most common. C E A A S,
yes. Yeah,
OK. Look, Uh, these sides of, of positive, positive
sides and negative sides, it's subjective, you know, there
are, uh, and, and I'm not trying to say
that, uh, for sure there are negative sides of
motherhood. This is not what I'm trying to say.
I'm trying to say that not all women. See,
uh, only the positive and would like to be
mothers. It's not that it is bad. It is
not, it's not that it is wrong. It is,
I'm just trying to say that there are women
who feel it doesn't suit them. It doesn't suit
them, you know, taking care of children, it's not,
it's not, I'm not talking about it in a
good or a bad way. I'm just saying that
there are women. Who don't want to dedicate their
lives. To this kind of uh relationship, and I'm
treating motherhood as a relationship, not as a job.
It is a relationship, one of many relationships we
have in human lives, and there are women who
are saying this kind of a relationship, we don't
want it. Uh, WE don't want to, to nurture
children. We don't know. We don't want their responsibility
to, to put limits. We want to do something
else with our lives. So I'm not trying to
say that there, I hope I'm understanding you, you
understand what I'm trying to say. I'm not dealing
whether it's. Good or bad because it's subjective, there
are women who see this, what I said, the
responsibility, taking care, the nurturing, like the, the first
and the important mission in our, in their lives,
and I truly understand that, and, and they love
it. Even, even though sometimes it's hard, so for
them it's worthwhile, I'm just saying that there are
women who look at it, who experience it, and
their bottom line is different. They are saying for
us. It's not worthwhile, and that's the story because
how can we, uh, you know, mother, motherhood has
so many angles and so many moments and it
can change along the day and it can change
along the years, so it's not something that is
fixed. It's not, I, I can't say that motherhood
is one thing. Motherhood is, it's like the number
of, of, um, terminologies and experiences in motherhood are
the same as the, uh, number of women who
are mothers, uh, in the world, you know, it's
not one thing. So I'm just saying that there
are women who, who, um, sometimes in advance without
becoming mothers and sometimes after the fact, after becoming
mothers, are saying this kind of relationship I don't
want to experience in my life. It doesn't suit
me.
Right, right, no, that's an important clarification. And why
is it that this topic of women who regret
being mothers is such a social taboo, because I
mean, even if we live in societies which are
predominantly pro-Nalist, I mean, couldn't it just be the
case that people would accept Could people would both
push for pro-natalism but also at the same time
accept that in public, in society in general, women
who regretted being mothers express their regret. I mean,
why is it that it's such a taboo topic?
I think, uh, for at least two reasons. One,
as we spoke before, motherhood is considered to be
like the main essence in life, uh, for women,
and, um, challenging this, uh, perception is like challenging
the social order more generally speaking, and I think
it's, uh, frightening for many societies. Whether they are,
as you said before, whether they are religious or
secular, it's like the, the, the ground everybody would
like it to keep it that way, like safe
ground, that this is the gender role and we
want to keep women in this role and regretting
motherhood when women are coming and saying, no, sorry
for us, for us it's not what you told
us, uh, we don't like it. AND we think
we have made a mistake. It's kind of like
rocking the boat and it's really frightening. So talking
about it, it's people would rather not to hear
it or like to deny that it exists. I
heard, I read people who are saying no, that's
bullshit, sorry, that's, it doesn't exist. It's just a
hard time. They are experiencing and when time will
pass, they will be all right. There is no
such a thing as regretting motherhood, so I think
this is one thing, the sacredness of motherhood. But
another thing is that I think that more generally
speaking, many societies are afraid of this emotional stance
of regret in general. Um, IT seems like, um,
like redundant emotion, uh, if it's not about a
sin or a crime, then people should not regret,
we should not look back, we should like go
ahead and, and, uh, and, and do what you
need to do in order to keep on going.
Don't look back. Uh, DON'T have second thoughts, just
move on. And these women are reminding us that
of course regret exists and we can regret everything,
and we do regret everything in life, and this
is human life. This is a part of being
a subject that we can look back and say,
well, I chose, I wish I could have chosen
a different path, and so society doesn't tend, uh,
don't tend to. APPRECIATE regret. It seems to be
like a kind of a loser position to be
in. They don't want us to cry, you know.
There's a saying, Don't cry over spoiled milk. Why,
why shouldn't we cry? Why can't we cry? So
you see, we are being told, don't, don't look
back and, and don't do that. Just go ahead.
And I think that if I will go back
to motherhood, then uh there is this perception, that
this common perception that because we are female that
it's only a matter of time, even though it's
hard now, you will be OK and you will,
you will like motherhood, you know, next year, the
year after it. And the year after it, OK,
in 10 years, you, the day will come and
you will appreciate motherhood, and here come, uh, women
who are, some of them in my study, some
of them are grandmothers already, and they are like
proving that it's not, not always a matter of
time. They are 70 years old. They are mothers
already for 30 or 40 years. They didn't change
their mind. They still think it was a mistake.
And they are not supplying the social catharsis, you
know, that, uh, yeah, everything after, after a while,
everything will be alright, and they are not, um,
delivering this, er, like happy end. That finally at
the end everything is all right. They love being
mothers, they love it, they enjoy it, and no,
they are coming, they are coming and saying, no,
no, I guess until grave I will regret motherhood,
and this is like kind of horrific for a
society that would like to think that it's only
a matter of time because you are a female.
Yeah, no, no, I imagine being such an irreversible
decision. It must be really painful, and we're going
to talk more about it, but I mean, you're
a sociologist. How do you approach the topic of
Regret and what does regret mean in this particular
context and what is the difference between, because this
is also something that you explore in your book,
what is the difference between regret and ambivalence?
Yeah, so I treat regret as The emotional stance,
it's like something that is something of the cognition
and emotion together, it's an emotional stance that er
weeps about uh the something that we cannot undo
and that we had. Some kind of responsibility of
making it happen, because you see I can't say
that I regret the weather today because I had
nothing to do with the weather today. I can't
say that I regret the weather. I can say
that I regret not taking an umbrella after seeing
that there will be a rain, so it's Kind
of my responsibility or my hand was involved in
it, and I wish I could have gone back
and do otherwise. It's not just looking back and
saying, oh well, interesting what could have been if,
it's also saying, oh my, I wish I could
have done something differently. And in my study, I
asked all the women who participated in it, uh,
if you would go back in time. And with
the experience and the knowledge you have today, would
you have become mothers? And all of the women
who participated in my study said no. In different
ways, they expressed their negative emotions about it and
they said no, I, I wouldn't have done it
again, and another thing that I asked is whether
they have some kind, they experience some kind of
advantages in motherhood, and some of them said. I
do experience several advantages, but the disadvantages are overweighting
the advantages, and others said, no, I don't see
any advantages in motherhood for me. And this brings
us to uh to dis uh distinguish regret from
ambivalence because ambivalence, it's, it's the both sides. Of
both sides, like I love it and I hate
it and I want to go away for a
bit from my children, but I miss them so
much. It is hard for me, but you know,
the but is a really like a really important
center here because many women can say I, I,
it's really hard, but Uh, motherhood means the world
to me, and I wouldn't have changed it for
a bit. I, I would have done it once
again, and the women I have interviewed are not
saying they don't have the butt, uh, because they're
saying it's hard. And I wish I wouldn't have
done it. So the but is like, um, it's
like not or, it's end, and it's hard, it's
hard, but uh. Uh, YOU know, in regret it's
hard in that period. They don't want anything else
but just wish to, to undo it. So I
hope I, I succeeded in, in, in explaining, but
the ambivalence, it's, it's like, it's so, it's, it's,
it's, um, it's a kind of a mixture of,
of opposite feelings, but they are all lived together.
Mhm. Right, no, no, yeah, it was a good
explanation. So let me ask you to learn more
about or for the audience to learn more about
the women who you interviewed and studied and who
expressed regret in terms of their motherhood. What routes
did they take to motherhood? I mean, was it
that some of them didn't really want to have
children, that they always said they didn't want to
have children, but in one way or another they
were coerced into having them? Was That they changed
their, they were sort of convinced by society that
they should be mothers and they fought they wanted
to be mothers, and it was only after the
fact that that they learned that it was actually
not something that they really wanted to be. I
mean, what routes did those women take?
Yeah, I, I, I, there are 3 main routes.
One of them, it's like 1/3 of the women
who participated in my study told me that they
didn't want to become mothers, but they were persuaded
into it, uh, most of the time by their
partners who sometimes really like, you know, said that
uh like threatened with divorce and even though they
knew they didn't want to be mothers, they said,
OK, I don't want to have to, I don't
want a divorce, and um I will do it,
and they did it and after the fact they,
they learned that they felt that they were right
not to want from the outset, so that's One
route, uh, the second route. You know, women sometimes
laughed in front of me when I asked them
what was your root, do you remember that if
you wanted to become a mother, and they laughed
in front of me because they said, I, I
don't know if I want it or not. I
don't know. I didn't, I didn't stop to think
about it because like, especially here in Israel, it's
like the natural, um, uh, journey you need to
go through. You get married, you have children, you
don't really stop to think. Do I want it?
Can I have children? Uh, AM I able to
raise children? They said to, they, they really laughed.
They said, I, until this day, I don't really
know why I did it. It was just like
the natural course of life. And the third route
was of women who really wanted to become mothers.
And they thought that it will bring joy and
calmness and like a kind of serenity into their
lives, and only in retrospect they understood that it
caused mainly they caused, it caused chaos in their
lives. So they really wanted to become others, and
they waited for it, and then they learned that
they suffer within it.
Right. So, uh, I mean, and how do they
react and transform, uh, cognitively and emotionally after the
birth of their children? I mean, what happens to
them, uh, psychologically?
Look, I'm a sociologist, so I didn't really study
the psychology of it. I just can, I, I,
I will say one thing that there are women
in my study who started to feel regret already
during the pregnancy, and, uh, some of them after
the first birth, some of them and only under
after the second, uh, in my study participated also
women who have 4 children. You know, 123, and
4 children, because in Israel we need, I need
to, I think I need to explain that in
Israel having 1 child, it's not the norm and
it's considered to be something like it's deviant to,
to have quote unquote only one child. So women
who had one child and if also if they
did understand that they regret. Couldn't afford themselves not
to have more children because here in Israel they
will be like kind of slandered if they have
only one child. Uh, THE perception here is that
one child, it's like a bad joke, uh, you
know, you start it, continue doing it. A child
must have brothers or sisters, otherwise it will be
something will be damaged, uh, socially, uh, with the,
like, uh, something will be wrong with them if
they, they will be too spoiled, too egoistic, they
will not know how to have friends, uh, they
will not know how to be in a partnership.
You must have more children. So some of them
continue to have more children even though they understood
after the already after the first one. And um
so I can't answer from a psychological perspective I
can't I can't say that um Many of them
feel guilty about it. And they do go to
get help. Like, uh, psychological help or something, or,
or someone who will guide them, but, um, they
are learning how to live with it. Yeah, people
should understand, regret, regret, it's not necessarily something that
you can wipe away and, and solve, solve it.
Maybe the way is to accept that you are
living a life that uh you, you prefer not
to leave them, but you have children and you
can't really like uh make it prettier. This is
the situation, you have children, you would have liked
to live a different life, and this is the
situation. Sometimes, uh, and I heard it from one
mother who regrets, she said that uh she went
to therapy, and there she got the message that,
yeah, it will, it will be alright, er, you
know, time will solve it, and when she understood
that that's not what's going, what is going to
happen. This is what cracked her, you know, she,
she broke. Due to the promise, the linear promise,
like a promise about linearity that time will, uh,
make it better, and when she understood that it's
not going to become better for her, she just
need to accept that this is what happened. Um,
IT really cracked her when she got this, uh,
false promises. It might, it might get easier for
some women, yes.
But I mean, the women who actually regret having
children, it never becomes easier for them, or does
it?
Uh, FOR some, maybe it will get easier. For
some it will stay just the same, you know,
I interviewed women. I told you I interviewed women
who are 70 years old, and the children, their
children already have children. They are grandmothers, and they
still feel regret. Yeah, so their children,
even at the stage in their life where supposedly
their children no longer depend on them.
Yeah, exactly. So I'm talking in my book about
I, I turned in, I termed it like a
consciousness motherhood. It's something that it's here. It doesn't
depend on the daily task. It's not in, it
doesn't, it's not rooted in actuality. It's a kind
of consciousness. You walk around on earth knowing that
you are somebody's mom. You know, and it's like
once a mother, always a mother, you will always
be a mother, even if your children are grown
up, even if they have children, uh, women who
are not becoming mothers. Have the consciousness of nobody's
mom, I'm nobody's mom. And mothers are somebody's mom.
Yeah, and even, you know, even if the children,
God forbid, but even if they are dead or
you are always a mother in here, you are
a mother,
yeah, yeah, yeah, so I mean there can be
this conflict or perhaps every one of them experiences
to a certain extent this conflict between Them wishing
to be nobody's mom and the fact that they
are actually and irreversibly mothers of children.
Exactly, exactly, and that's a fact, they are mothers
of children and in their inner worlds they would
like to be nobody's mom. There's trash there. Yeah.
Mhm. Uh,
SO there's also earlier we were talking about some
of the most common ideas that people have about
motherhood and for example, the idea that, uh, yeah,
even if they don't like it being mothers at
early. Stages then probably later they will stop regretting
it or things will get better and there's also
the idea when women express wishing to be, as
we said, nobody's mom or wishing to be child
free. It is also very common that people tell
them, oh yeah. I mean, you will change your
mind later and you will want to become a
mother, things like that, but another very common idea
is that motherhood makes women complete. So, but what
are the real reactions that mothers have to their
own motherhood?
Ah. Men, many of the women I interviewed said
that. Even though we are being told, as you
said, that motherhood will make you complete, they felt
that it, it drains them. It takes something from
them, like they experience loss. Not that it makes
them something like uh more rounder or uh wider
or bigger, that they are becoming small, that they
are becoming, they, they are losing things, they are
losing themselves, uh, they are uh so many kind
of, and they're not the only, the first one,
wants to say, you know, there is a lot
of theoretical feminists. Article writing about what motherhood might
make for women might do for women, and it's
already been written about the losses also in motherhood.
You need to sometimes to say goodbye and farewell
to a person you have been before and many
of them miss this person. And and they don't
feel that motherhood gave them something that it is
um appreciated by them. Uh, I must say that
each and every one of the women who participated
in my study said, the children I love, my
children I love. I love my children. I love
them, they are great persons, they, it's good that
they are in the world. But I don't, uh,
I, but I hate. Being in the position in
this position. In my relationship with them, meaning I,
I love my children, I hate being their mother.
So they, they do feel that it's, it's good
and, and appreciated that they, they, that, that these
children are in the world. But they would have
wanted someone else to be their mothers and not
themselves.
Yeah. No, yeah, because there's also this very common
idea that people who I mean, people who love
children would also necessarily want to have their own
children, but that's not always the case, and there's
a, it's not, it's also not always the case
that people who don't want to have their own
children, it's because they hate children. That's also not
necessarily the case,
right? Exactly. We are doing so many wrong connections
between the things. And it's like a kind of
shallow shallow connections between the things because we can
have so many different relationships with children without being
the par their parents and um let's say like
that, let's like draw like a kind of a
spectrum, let's say upfront there are people who don't
like children. And and it's not that they, let's
put it more accurately, they don't enjoy being around
children. They don't like the, like to the kind
of um. Language to use, the, the games, it's
boring for them, they don't, they don't think they
have the access to the hearts of children, they
don't know how to talk to them, so they
prefer as much as they can not to be
around children. It's not that they hate, but they
don't, they don't, OK, maybe sometimes people do hate
children, but I'm talking about they don't, they don't,
they're not interested in being around children, so this
is one side of the spectrum. On the other
side of, and, and, and I'm talking here about
parents and non-parents alike. There are also parents and
there are parents who are saying, I don't like
children, I don't like being around children, uh, unless
it's my children. OK, so there is this, so
parents and non-parents alike could be on this side
of the spectrum. On the other side, there are
people who are saying, I love being with children.
I enjoy it. I feel vivid. I like being
creative around children. I like their curiosity. I like
to play games with them. I like it. And
there are some people who want to work with
children as teachers and consult consultors in kindergarten, you
know, and on this side, parents and non-parents alike
can be. And, and say that also women who
don't want to uh to become mothers. I, I
know a lot of women who don't want to
become mothers, but they do work with children because
they love being around children and in the middle.
So many of us, uh, who travel along the
spectrum, you know, it depends on which day, it
depends on which children we are talking about, it
depends on so many things, and we are like
moving on this spectrum, non non-parents and parents alike,
yeah.
But I mean, let me ask you one more
question about regret, and then I will have just
one final topic I would like to ask you
about. I, I want to address this question because
we hear it very frequently from people who have
a more traditional view of gender roles, people who
are conservative and sometimes even anti-feminists, who, I, I
mean, does this regret, uh, this regret of being
a mother stem in any way from women? Being
forced to choose between having children and pursuing a
career, I mean, does it have anything to do
with that, or, I mean, or, or does it
have nothing to do with that, and they would
have that regret even if they have a career
it has just to do with the fact that
they are mothers.
That's a very good question because there is a
like a misconception that women who don't want to
become mothers are necessarily career women, and that's a,
that's a, it's, it's a misconception, of course, of
course there are women who are not mothers who
are career women, but most of the women. Uh,
ARE not that who are not, uh, who don't
want to be mothers are not career women. They
are working, you know, because, uh, they need to
support themselves, uh, in a world that we need
money, so they love their work or need to
work, but they are not career women. Why is
this, is the, you know, why is this is
the, the, um, the, I don't know how to
say it, um. Uh, AXIOM, there is an axiom
of like motherhood and career. Why is it like
that that we are, yeah, yeah,
it's, it's sort of a dilemma, right? You have
to choose one or the other or something like
that,
yeah, yeah. But, but, but why we are being
told that either you are a mother or you
are a woman, a woman, because. We have so
limited imagination about diverse identities of women. We are
being told because in a heteronormative society it's really
binary. Either you are a woman or you are
a man. So we are being told if you
are becoming a mother, so you are a real
woman. If you're not becoming a mother, so you
are not a real woman. If you are not
a real woman, so what are you? You are
like a man. You are like a man, so
probably what's important in your life, it's career. But
there are more identities of women. Uh, IT'S not,
uh, uh, you are a real woman or a
man. There are so many other identities of the
women who want to be this and this, none
of this and none of this, so many, you
know, combination, and the other reason for that is
that um women who are not mothers are being
um asked to prove that they are doing something.
WITH their lives. If you are not a mother,
then at least be a career woman, at least
do something with your life. If you're not a
mother, at least, at least be like a really
uh important musician or important writer or do something
because otherwise, what is the meaning of your life?
If you are not a mother, you are nothing.
So please prove to us that there is any
kind, any sort of meaning to your life, so
at least be a career woman, do something with
your life. I would like to live in a
world when, where a woman can say, well, I'm,
I'm not a mother. And if she's being asked,
so what are you do, what do you do
with your life, so I will say I just
like, you know, draw a dot on, on, on
my wall and I just throw a paper airplanes,
and, and, and this is what I do with
my life. I don't need to prove, I don't
need to improve. Yeah, I'm just doing, I, I,
I'm, I, I, this is the meaning of my
life, or I don't have, I don't know what's
the meaning of my life, but I will not,
you know, uh, need to deliver recipe like, like
proof. Yeah, that my life has a meaning if
I'm not a mother.
Yeah, which is very interesting because I mean perhaps
even more so when we are talking about religious
people because we hear very commonly from them that
people have inherent value, that is people are valuable
just by existing regardless of what they do or
who they are, but at the same time when
people are Confronted with people who make the decision
to not be mothers, sometimes also fathers, but and
people who express regret for being mothers and things
like that, actually it seems like they're only valuable
to other people if they sort of fulfill their
Expected role, the role that society expects from them
in some way or another, as you were saying,
if they are not mothers, at the very least
they have to have some sort of economic value
or something like that,
right? Yeah, and it's really, you know, it's like
a kind of a circle, really interesting circle because
People demand that we have uh some sort of
value, but in the first place, I know it's
kind of philosophical saying, but we were not being
uh nobody asked. Us, if we would like to
be in this world, you know, we, uh, someone
brought us into this world and now we are
being sent to prove that there is a meaning
in our life. I, I, nobody was asking us,
uh, if we want to be born, if we,
we, if we, we, what's the meaning of, of
our consent to be born. We were not asked,
and now we are being thrown into life. And
prove that you have a meaning, and the, the
first question is, why do I need to prove
anything? Nobody asked me. I know it's philosophical and
I know, I know that we are not, we
cannot be asked about it, but why are, we
are being blamed. For not participating in this race.
And why can't we say, well, I don't know,
I was thrown into life. I'm not going to
end it. I'm not going to do something to
myself. I'm, I'm just trying to be. I'm just
trying to be. I'm here. It's a matter of
fact, I'm here. I don't need to prove anything.
Yeah, so let me ask you about one final
topic then. How do you think that motherhood should
be approached in society then? Because of course, I
mean, I, I think it's, it's not realistic to
expect that people will ever not be. Pro-natalist, I
mean that, that's just the way that the societies
work because, uh, I mean, societies want to survive,
want to propagate, and so on, but, uh, in,
in terms of regretting motherhood, do you think that
we should tell women. That that's a possibility, or
at least tell them about the possible negative experiences
associated with motherhood, or if not that, perhaps we.
JUST be open and uh I mean accommodating for
women when they express their regret in your understanding,
what is the best way of approaching that?
I will start with motherhood. I think that it's
great, and who am I to say that, but
I will say that it's great when women want
to become mothers and becoming mothers, and this is
the only way I think women should become mothers
when they truly. Want to become mothers. I'm against,
you know, giving license to people, whether to have
children or not. Sometimes people are talking about parent
who should be licensed. Uh, I, I'm not pro
this approach because wherever there is a license, there
are people who will decide who will be a
parent and who will. BE a parent and I'm
afraid of this kind of committees. It's like a
slippery slippery slope for racism and homophobic and you
know, thoughts against people who are poor and so
I would like to live in a society in
which people have the liberty to uh to Really
go inside and ask themselves whether they want to
become parents and uh whether they are able to
raise children. And I think that if we will
live in a society with such a liberty, maybe
less children will be born, but less suffer as
well will be in the world, and the children
who will, who will be born will have like
a more, maybe I hope, I think more pleasant
life because They were wanted er because their parents
were, were able to raise them, and I'm not
talking about only economically, I think that also poor
people can raise like children who are who are
uh feeling er wanted, er loved, being cared of.
It's not, I'm not talking here economically. And you
know, people can be very rich and, and treat
their children really poorly. So it's not about the
money, it's about something inside that you, you want,
you want it, and you are able to, to
do it also to one child, two children, 37.
And, and 8, OK. So this is the first
thing that I think it's really, it's kind of
naive maybe to say it, but that, that's the,
that's for me, that's the only way to become
parents, when people want it, really, truly want it
and are able to do it, and And I
think that uh it should be open and not
being panic about it, that. Just the same regret
exists about everything in life, you know, people, as
I said before, people regret about everything. Why did
I get married? Why didn't I get married? Why
did I have this tattoo and not this tattoo?
Why I did this tattoo here and not there,
uh, why did I start smoking? Why didn't I
do, uh, sports enough in my life, and why
did I start studying this and not that. We,
we regret. Everything, so it's really human to treat
regretting motherhood as something that it's, it's logic, and
I'm not glorifying it and I'm not promoting it.
That's not the, the thing that I'm saying. I'm
just saying it exists because, you know, when women
don't want to be mothers, so many times they
are being told you have to be a mother.
You don't know how it will change your life.
Well, exactly. It might change your life and not
for the best. So of course there will be,
there will also be women who look back and
say, well, it didn't change my life for the
better. So we need to just like breathe and
understand that it exists and that the sky are
not falling. I'm not saying that it's, it's nice
or, or pleasant to feel regretting feel regret about
motherhood, but as a society we just need to
accept that it exists. And we just uh need
to, to, to um make sure. That women and
men have the liberty. To, to decide which path
to go in their life and, and, um, yeah,
I, I don't think we, we need to, uh,
talk all the time about regretting motherhood. It's nice
also to talk about the nice thing about motherhood
and parenthood. It's nice. There are many nice things
in motherhood and fatherhood and parenthood, but we should
not silence. The uh experiences of of people who
are saying, well, we, we need to take into
account that not for each and everyone who are
becoming parents, it will be the best thing that
ever happened to them, and some might regret it,
yes.
Mhm. OK, great. So the book is again regretting
Motherhood Study, and I will be leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview. And
Dr. Donna, uh, are there any places on the
internet where people can find your work more broadly?
Uh, NO, I'm not on the, you know, it's
sporadically. I don't have a site and I'm not
on social media. Uh, THERE is a site called
Academia.com. But and, and some of my, uh, articles
are there, yeah, but there is no one place.
OK, OK, that's fine.
It's not unfortunately. I'm not there. I'm not on
social media. Yeah,
OK, so thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
fascinating conversation.
Thank you so much. It was really, really my
honor and my pleasure. Thank you, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Gressy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Gelbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.